[Music]
in the world's deepest gold mines
people work at a depth of over 13 000
feet
the deepest oil well on the planet is
the z44
chavo oil and gas well located in the
russian far
east it goes more than forty thousand
feet down
that's 15 burj khalifa towers put on top
of each other
one of the world's deepest and most
famous artificial holes
is the kola super deep borehole its
depth is also
over forty thousand feet if you dropped
a coin down the shaft
it would be falling for fifty seconds
before it reached the bottom
a mere nine inches across this well was
created for scientific purposes
people wanted to drill through the
earth's crust and see what lay below
they managed to pass only one third of
the way
after that the temperature reached 356
degrees fahrenheit
and the drill couldn't operate any
longer
but what if by some miracle you managed
to drill a hole
all the way through earth you've got
through eight thousand miles of molten
magma and solid rock
you've withstood the temperatures of
almost 11 000 degrees fahrenheit
and extreme pressure more than 300
million times more than at the surface
of the planet
the well is wide enough for an adult to
pass without having to squeeze through
it's also perfectly straight the holes
walls are incredibly strong
and won't collapse or melt and then
while standing on the well's edge
admiring your handiwork
you slip and fall into the gaping of
this
considering gravity acceleration and the
earth's diameter
it would take you just 42 minutes to
fall through the entire planet
you'd reach the maximum speed of 18 000
miles per hour
at the earth's center and in less than
an hour
you'd emerge on the other side of the
planet
unfortunately in the real world you
might not even get through the first
mile of your fall
the coriolis effect is to blame our
planet's surface
moves at a speed of 1000 miles per hour
at the equator
but earth's insides don't need to move
that fast
picture a racetrack traveling along its
inner part you'll drive a shorter
distance
than when moving along the outer side it
means that soon after falling into the
hole
your speed will become greater than that
of the hole around you
after traveling for one mile you'll
crash into the side of the well
and begin to careen and bounce off its
size
if you were halfway to the center of the
earth at that point your speed would be
1500 miles per hour faster than the
walls of the hole
but let's say you know about this effect
and manage to avoid it
by digging a hole directly through the
earth's poles
only in this case will the gravity pull
you straight down
on your way to the earth center you'll
see tons of cool stuff
first you funnel past countless rabbit
warrens and mole tunnels
by the way a mole can dig a 60 foot long
tunnel in a day when you're about 10
feet down
you have a near crash with a giant
earthworm
if the creature was standing it would
reach your waist
at a depth of 26 feet you dash past the
tunnels dug
under the mall man's home william little
a british civil engineer spent about 40
years to create an enormous web of
caverns and burrows
stretching far beyond his house almost
twice deeper and you're speeding by a
nile crocodile
this reptile digs the deepest burrows
among all animals
you hardly have enough time to recover
from this shock when you fly by a
is it an underground farm indeed you
spot
vegetables and herbs growing there you
zip
through the bottom of the deepest
swimming pool in the world
it's the y40 diving pool in montegrato
terramay
italy it goes 131 feet down
for some reason it's not filled with
water at the moment and you need a mere
three seconds to reach its bottom
when you're more than 500 feet
underground you spot people lounging in
a hotel room
it's salah silvermine the world's
deepest hotel
built in a converted silver mine at a
depth of 3 300 feet
you start to experience immense pressure
it feels as if four
elephants were piled up on your head
after that
you can continue your journey only if
you're wearing a suit that can protect
you from the ever increasing heat and
air pressure
you move deeper and see the home stake
gold mine
almost five thousand feet below the
surface before closing
it was the deepest and largest gold mine
in north america
in the 1960s scientists detected and
counted tiny subatomic particles from
the sun
they did it in a lab located inside the
mine
after falling for another second or so
you reach
permafrost it's a thick permanently
frozen layer of soil
that doesn't warm up even in the summer
it mainly occurs in polar regions
and is the thickest in northern siberia
now you're more than six thousand feet
below the surface
and you still come across some living
creatures those are springtails
teeny eyeless insects that live in the
crew barra cave in georgia
but the deepest multicellular animal you
meet lives at a depth of 11
800 feet in the tautona mine in south
africa
tiny but incredibly hardy this worm can
deal with extreme temperatures and
dehydration
four miles down and you dash through the
oceanic crust
it's the part of the earth's crust that
lies under the ocean
and is much thinner than the continental
crust
twice deeper than that and the tunnel
leads you through a pool of
scorching hot molten rock that's
yellowstone super volcano's
magma chamber below yellowstone national
park
it means you're about to leave earth's
outermost layer
the crust behind the deeper you go
the hotter it gets at the boundary with
the mantle
about 18 miles below the surface the
temperature reaches
750 degrees fahrenheit now you're moving
through earth's upper mantle
the pressure there reaches 10 000
atmospheres
like more than 130 elephants standing on
your head
but it's nothing compared with the lower
mantle pressure
240 000 atmospheres the temperatures
keep
rising as well near the boundary with
the planet's core
it's already more than 7000 degrees
fahrenheit
the outer core is 1500 miles thick and
is made mostly of iron and nickel
in their liquid form there earth's
magnetic field
is 50 times more powerful than at the
surface
you are more than 3 000 miles down
underground
when you reach earth's inner core it's
incredibly dense
and spins faster than the rest of the
planet it's almost as hot as the surface
of the sun
9 800 degrees fahrenheit the pressure
inside the inner core
is 3 million times greater than on the
surface
and still you somehow make it through
this solid ball of metal
and back to the surface in real life
though
you'd be crushed by immense pressure and
burned by incredible temperatures
soon after the beginning of your fall no
suit would be able to protect you from
such extreme conditions
even if neither pressure nor scorching
heat influenced you
you'd still have several serious
problems on your hands
and all of them would be connected with
air for one thing it would be
air resistance it would pull you to a
stop
long before you reach the core but a
much worse
issue would be air pressure the deeper
you'd get down the hall
the more air would be above your head
and the higher its pressure would be
at a depth of 30 miles it would be as
great as that at the ocean bottom
after several hundred miles the air
would turn into an almost
solid plug blocking your way but let's
say
you knew about this problem in advance
and pulled all the air out of the well
before plunging in
and now you're moving in a vacuum
dressed in a special suit with a large
oxygen supply
still you're going to come across
something bizarre on your way
during your fall you'll notice that the
force pulling you downward
starts to weaken and once you reach the
center of the planet
it'll disappear whatsoever earth is an
almost perfect sphere
that's why the gravitational forces
coming from the mass surrounding the
planet's center
counteract one another feeling equal
pulls from all sides
you'll become weightless paradoxically
you'll be floating in the air and moving
at breakneck speed at the same time
soon you'll travel through earth's inner
core and keep going until you get to the
other side
in any case this situation is entirely
hypothetical
the very idea of building an 8 000 mile
long tunnel
sounds implausible you'd need to find
where to store
all the material pulled out of the hole
including earth's molten insides
you'd also have to ensure your tunnel
wouldn't collapse while going through
the planet's liquid layers
its walls would have to be made of a
material that could withstand the heat
of more than 10
000 degrees fahrenheit so far no
substance on earth can remain intact
at such temperatures